DescriptionThe meniscus is a soft piece of cartilage that acts as a shock absorber to protect the knee.  There are two of these C-shaped pads in each knee and they are crescent-shaped.  A discoid meniscus is thicker than normal and has a different shape and texture.  It is more likely to be injured than a normally shaped meniscus.  There are people who will have a discoid meniscus and never experience an injury, but some people have problems because of it, usually during childhood.  While a discoid meniscus is present from birth, injuries can occur with twisting motions to the knee, usually during pivoting motion or changes in direction while playing sports.SymptomsSometimes kids with a torn discoid meniscus will feel:* Pain* Stiffness or swelling* Unable to fully straighten the knee* Catching, popping, or locking of the knee* Buckling or “giving out” of the knee ExaminationYour doctor will discuss your medical history and examine your knee.  A test for a discoid meniscus involves twisting the knee with the knee bent and straight.  Sometimes there is a popping or clunking feeling. X-Rays and TestsYour doctor will often start with x-rays.  Sometimes the space between the femur (thigh bone) and tibia (lower leg bone) can appear wide on an x-ray, however x-rays do not show soft tissue very well.  An MRI may be ordered to show the discoid meniscus or any tears within it. TreatmentIf the discoid meniscus is found but it is not causing any problems, treatment may not be necessary.  When it is causing pain, popping, or other problems a discoid meniscus is usually treated with surgery.  The orthopaedic surgeon will make a few small incisions around the knee and use a small camera and surgical instruments to treat the meniscus.  These surgeries are done under anesthesia and patients are able to go home the same day. After surgery, a knee brace or soft bandage is sometimes needed.  A wheelchair or crutches may be useful for a short period of time.  Physical therapy may be prescribed to regain mobility and strength following surgery. Outcomes (Prognosis/Expectations) If the discoid meniscus is never painful, it is possible to live with it without problems.  Treatment for a painful discoid meniscus usually results in a painless knee that functions well.  Children tend to do better if they are older when the symptoms begin.  There is an increased risk of arthritis or another meniscus tear after an injury. 