DescriptionFlexible flat feet in children are very common. We say “flexible”, because the arch of the foot disappears when the child is standing but re-appears when the child is sitting or standing on tiptoes (see figures 1a & 1b). Flexible flat feet usually do not cause any pain or problems with walking. Most children with flexible flat feet can participate in sports and gym and wear regular shoes without difficulty.SymptomsFlexible flat feet work just like feet that are not flat. Most children are born with flat feet, and the arch usually develops by the time they are 10 years old. However, there are some children who do not outgrow their flat feet. Even for feet that remain flat into adulthood, they usually do not cause pain or problems with standing, walking, sports participation or work.Some adolescents with flexible flat feet do have pain along the bottom of the foot. If this happens, an examination and visit with a doctor should be scheduled.A rigid flat foot means that there is still no arch in the foot, even when the child is standing on tiptoes.Evaluation & ExaminationThe doctor will want to know when the flat feet were first noticed, if anyone in the family or your child has a nerve or muscle disease, and how your child has been functioning. He or she will perform a thorough examination of the foot and legs to make sure that your child does have flexible flat feet. Flat feet that are rigid and not flexible may indicate a more serious problem.Other TestsFlexible flat feet can be diagnosed by your doctor with a good examination. Usually, other studies are not needed. However, if the flat feet are causing pain, are rigid, or there are signs of nerve or muscle problems, X-rays or other tests may be ordered.TreatmentThe vast majority of flexible flat feet do not need any treatment, especially if there is no pain. There are no exercises, braces, special shoes, or shoe inserts that will change the shape of a flexible flat foot. Children with flexible, painless flat feet can wear regular shoes and participate in all activities.If the heel cords (Achilles tendons) are tight and causing pain with activity, heel cord stretches can help. To do a heel cord stretch - stand about 3 steps away from a wall. Put one foot in front and bend that knee. Keep the back knee straight. You can use your hands to support your weight against the wall as you lean forward. Make sure to keep both heels on the ground. Hold for 30 seconds, and then switch legs.Soft shoe inserts to support the arch can also help children and teenagers with arch pain from flexible flat feet. Regular sneakers with built-in arch support can also be used. Studies have shown that inexpensive cushioned shoe inserts bought in a store or a pharmacy off the rack work just as well as expensive custom orthotics or special shoes. Hard, rigid arch supports can actually cause more pain and should be avoided.In very rare cases, children and teenagers with flexible flat feet will continue to have pain even after stretching and shoe inserts. Some flexible flat feet may become rigid as the child grows. In those cases, consulting with a pediatric orthopaedic surgeon may be needed to see if surgery can help.PrognosisMost children with flexible flat feet do not require medical or surgical treatment. They can wear regular shoes and participate in all activities throughout their life. For some children who have pain, soft arch supports can help. Surgery is rarely needed for this condition.