DescriptionPediatric foot fractures are <10% of all fractures in children. They are more common in adolescents with a mean age of 13 years old.Types of FracturesThe foot is divided into 3 Parts:Ê* Hindfoot: Talus, Calcaneus (heel bone):o Most common fracture is a fracture at the neck of the talus. ÊThe blood supply to the talus bone can be affected by this fracture. ÊA fracture of the lateral process of the talus is known as ÒsnowboarderÕs fractureÓ.o Calcaneal (heel) fractures are very rare under 15 years of age. ÊSome calcaneal fractures can cause tension on the overlying skin which must be treated urgently. ÊOveruse can cause inflammation at the growth plate (apophysis) of the calcaneus which is called SeverÕs disease.Ê* Midfoot: Navicular, Cuboid, Cuneiforms:o Isolated fractures of the mid-foot are rare in children.Êo The Lisfranc ligament runs between the medial cuneiform and second metatarsal bones. ÊA fracture at the bottom of the second metatarsal is concerning for injury to the Lis Franc ligament and may be further evaluated with a CT or MRI. ÊFractures of the cuboid can also be associated with Lisfranc injuries.* Forefoot: Metatarsals, Phalanges (toes):o The most common pediatric foot fractures are metatarsal fractures. ÊIn toddlers, most common injury is to the first metatarsal (great toe side). Ê5th metatarsal (small toe side) is most common in teenagers. ÊOveruse can cause stress fractures in the metatarsal.o The second most common pediatric foot fractures are phalanx (toe) fractures. ÊFractures at the bottom of the nailbed may require surgery to prevent infection.o In growing children, fractures in the foot may involve the growth plate (physis). ÊIt is rare for growth plate fractures of the foot to affect the growth of the foot.SymptomsIf there has been a significant fall, collision or crushing involving the foot and there is pain, swelling or a crack was felt, an X-ray should be obtained to check for fracture. ÊChildren with foot fractures are usually unable to put weight on the foot or limp significantly with walking. ÊÊExaminationDoctors will check the skin for any open wounds, bruising or swelling. ÊIn fractures of the heel bone, the skin will be checked to ensure it is not pale as the bone can push the skin and restrict the blood flow. ÊThe foot will also be assessed to be sure the muscles and nerves are working and the circulation is normal. ÊImagingÊX-rays will be performed the confirm the diagnosis of a foot fracture. ÊA doctor may order a CT scan or MRI to help guide treatment decisions if the fracture is displaced or involving a joint or growth plate.TreatmentDepending on the way the bone is broken, a hard sole shoe, walking boot or cast may be used for treatment. Sometimes your doctor will want you to use crutches to keep the weight off of the foot while the bones heal. ÊIf the bones have moved or ÒdisplacedÓ, surgery may be recommended. ÊDifferent implants including pins, screws, and plates may be used to treat foot fractures. ÊA cast or boot will be used after surgery to protect the fracture while it heals.OutcomesMost children recover from their foot fractures within 1-3 months depending on the bone that was fractured. After they come out of their boot or cast, they will often limp and turn their feet out for a short period of time. Most children will not require physical therapy to regain their motion and strength in that leg. If your child was treated with an implant, the doctor may recommend removing the implant in the future. Your doctor may follow the fracture longer if it involved a joint or a growth plate.