OverviewRickets is a disease in children caused by a lack of vitamins in the body. These vitamins are calcium, phosphorus, or Vitamin D. Rickets can cause bones to be weak or deformed. Over time, the bones become crooked and deformed. Crooked or bowed legs are a common finding in children with rickets. Although it is preventable, rickets is still seen in some parts of the world, including the United States. Rickets can also be inherited. This page discusses nutritional rickets only.Risk factors* Breast milk does not have enough Vitamin D for babies. Children who are only breastfed are at risk for rickets. Most pediatricians recommend Vitamin D drops for babies who are only fed breast milk.* Children who do not get enough calcium or who otherwise have an unhealthy, unvaried diet can be at risk for rickets.* Lactose intolerance may lead to rickets due to restricted intake of dairy products.* Humans need sun exposure to make Vitamin D in our skin. Lack of sun exposure can cause a Vitamin D deficiency. People with dark skin may need more sun exposure to make enough Vitamin D.SymptomsChildren with rickets may be sleepy or drowsy. They can have weak muscle tone. Seizures may occur. They may have slow or delayed growth and development. Bowed legs may develop, as well as deformities of the spine, chest, and ribs.Examination & EvaluationYour doctor will perform a thorough history and physical. If your doctor is worried about rickets, he or she will order other tests.X-rays: X-rays show abnormalities of the growth plates (Figure 1), fractures, and bone deformities (Figure 2). They can also help to assess bone health.Labs: Blood tests can measure the levels of Vitamin D, calcium, and phosphorus in the blood.TreatmentTreatment usually begins with calcium and Vitamin D supplements. Your doctor may also recommend some dietary changes. Children with inherited rickets will usually be treated by an endocrinologist.PrognosisThe prognosis for most children with rickets is good, once treatment has begun. Some of the bony deformities can correct over time. In some cases, surgery will be needed to correct deformities, such as severely bowed legs.PreventionGrowing children need enough calcium and Vitamin D to be healthy. Vitamin D is often added to milk and other dairy products. Infants need 400 IU of Vitamin D per day up to age 1 year. Babies who are exclusively breast fed require a Vitamin D supplement. Older children require up to 600 IU per day.Many foods such as dairy products and vegetables like kale contain calcium. Supplements may also be taken. Babies require 200-260 mg per day of calcium. Young children (1-3 years old) require 700 mg per day of calcium, children 4-8 years old require 1,000 mg per day, and adolescents require 1,300 mg per day.