DescriptionSpina bifida happens early in pregnancy when the developing spine does not close properly. Infants born with spina bifida can have an open area on their back where nerve damage can occur. There are 3 types of spina bifida. * Spina bifida occulta: the bones in the back of the spine do not properly form, but there is no nerve damage present. There can be a dimple or hairy patch present on the back over the area.* Meningocele: there is a fluid filled sac outside the skin, but no nerve damage occurs.* Myelomeningocele (MM): the most severe form, where the spinal cord and nerves form outside the body. Most children have weakness and loss of feeling in their legs. They can also have problems with bowel and bladder function.   Causes The exact cause of spina bifida is unknown. Mothers who do not take enough folic acid (a common B vitamin) are more likely to have children with spina bifida. Prenatal vitamins contain folic acid and other common vitamins important for the developing child. Prevention Women who are pregnant or are considering getting pregnant should take Folic acid supplements. This can reduce the risk of spina bifida by 70%. Symptoms Most children with MM or meningocele are diagnosed while in the womb during routine ultrasound or blood tests. Milder cases can be diagnosed after birth if the baby has a hairy patch at the bottom of the back. Patients with myelomeningocele have trouble feeling and moving their legs. They can also have tight joints that do not bend well. Many patients have a foot that is bent down and inward, known as a clubfoot. Spina bifida occulta does not have any symptoms and may never be diagnosed unless an x-ray is taken. Examination Children with spina bifida occulta may never have any symptoms and do not need special tests. However, children with MM and meningocele can have many problems and need specialty care. This can include orthopaedic surgeons, neurosurgeons, urologists and rehabilitation specialists. Treatment There is no cure for spina bifida. Nerves in the spinal cord that have been damaged cannot be repaired. Treatment is aimed to help children walk or sit better in a wheelchair. Many children will need braces, crutches or other aids to help them walk. Surgery Children with spina bifida and MM may need surgery to help them walk or sit better. Some children will need surgery on their back to straighten an abnormal curvature of their spine, known as kyphosis and/or scoliosis. Hip surgery is also common to help keep the hips positioned correctly. Many children with MM have a clubfoot, where the foot is turned inward and downward. Sometimes this can be corrected with casts and other children may need surgery to position their feet forward. Children with MM may also have problems with a tethered spinal cord or difficulty with bladder function. An allergy to latex products may develop due to repeated exposure to latex during bladder catheterization. They may need surgery to release the spinal cord as they grow, or surgery to help them use the bathroom easily.