What Is Asthma?
Basic facts for children and families
What causes asthma? No one really knows what causes a person to have asthma (pronounced
“az ma”), but we do know that a lot of people have it. About 1 out of
every 10 kids has it. That means about 3 kids in your classroom have
asthma just like you! They live in a lot of places — in big cities, small
towns, and even on farms! We also know that even though it can be
hard when you have asthma, in most cases it is not serious.
Every kid with asthma needs to see a healthcare provider at least once a
year. Together, you can make a written plan for what to do when you
are having an asthma attack and what to do when you’re not. To take
charge of your asthma, you can:
• Stay away from those things that can start an asthma attack. These
are called asthma triggers. Everybody has different triggers, and you
will need to find out what yours are.
• Keep your medicines and spacers with you wherever you go. Most
kids use an inhaler with a spacer, diskus, or flexhaler. Some kids use a
nebulizer. Learning to use these devices takes a lot of practice.
• Learn your body’s signals that let you know if your asthma is
• getting worse.
• Let an adult know if your asthma gets worse.
What happens when
I have an asthma
attack?
The air you breathe goes in and out of your lungs through tubes. Three
things happen when you have an asthma attack:
1. The tubes in your lungs get swollen.
2. The muscles around the tubes get tight.
3. Your lungs make mucus.
When these things happen, your chest feels tight and it’s hard to breathe.
You may cough or “wheeze.” Wheezing is when you make a whistling sound
when you breathe. It might be hard to talk, and you may wake up at night
coughing. An asthma attack can happen in just a few minutes or over a few
hours.
What should I do
when I have an
asthma attack?
If you have asthma, you and your healthcare provider will make a special
plan together, just for you. You need to use your plan if you have an asthma
attack.
What do I tell other
kids about my
asthma?
Most kids with asthma can do what other kids can do. They just have to be a
little more careful, that’s all. You might not have to tell other kids anything
about your asthma. But if you do, you can just say that there are things that
make it hard for you to breathe sometimes and that you take medicine for it.
Remember these
things
• You are not contagious. No one can “catch” asthma from you. You can
hug or kiss your family and friends.
• You are not weak. Asthma has nothing to do with being strong or weak,
any more than getting chickenpox or a cold has to do with being strong
or weak. In fact, many world-class athletes have asthma. For example,
DeAndre Jordan (NBA player), David Beckham (professional soccer
player) and Amy Van Dyken (Olympic medalist in swimming) all have
asthma.
• There’s nothing you did that caused you to get asthma. It’s not your fault.
• If you have asthma, the main thing to know is this:
You can do most anything.