WHAT ARE “DVT,
” “PE,
” AND “VTE”? HOW COMMON
ARE THEY IN CHILDREN?
Definitions:
Deep vein thrombosis or DVT: A
blood clot in your deep veins.
Pulmonary embolism or PE: A blood
clot in your lungs.
Venous thromboembolism or VTE:
The term that members of your health
care team use to refer to both DVT and
PE together.
Blood clot: The way most people
outside the medical field describe VTE.
Blood clots can also develop in the blood
vessels of your lungs, or travel to your
lungs from deep veins in your body, where
they had originally formed. This is called
pulmonary embolism,
“PE.
”
DVT and PE can happen at any age.
Although they happen more commonly in
adults, they can also happen in children.
About 1 in 10,000 children get DVT or PE,
including as many as 1 in 200 hospitalized
children.
Pediatric hematologist: A type of
doctor specially trained to treat
children’s blood disorders.
Blood clots can develop in the deep veins
that carry blood back to the heart from
your arms or legs. They can also develop in
other deep veins, including those that
carry blood back to the heart from your
head and neck, or the organs in your
abdomen (belly). This is called deep vein
thrombosis, or “DVT.
”
This resource on blood clots in children is
designed for use by patients under 21,
their families, and their health care
providers. In this resource, we review the
causes, signs and symptoms, diagnosis,
treatment, and long-term effects of
DVT/PE.
We also explain the importance of a team
approach for children with DVT/PE, and
we recommend that this team should
include a pediatric (child-focused)
hematologist (blood doctor) who has
experience in taking care of children who
have DVT/PE. Although some of the
information also applies to clots in large
arteries, the focus is DVT/PE.
stoptheclot.orgWHAT CAUSES DVT/PE IN CHILDREN?
Definitions:
Genetic thrombophilia: Inherited
clotting conditions that can increase a
child’s tendency to form blood clots.
Acute: Sudden or short-term.
Chronic: Long-term.
The following health issues can
cause (or add to the risk of
developing) DVT/PE in children:
but a standard IV catheter is not possible.
It may also happen when certain
medications, such as some chemotherapy
drugs are given.
Inherited clotting conditions (also
known as “genetic thrombophilias”).
One of the most common inherited
conditions that increase the risk of
DVT/PE is called factor V Leiden. This
change in the gene for clotting factor
V is present in approximately 5% of
people who describe themselves as
Caucasian. When a person has factor V
Leiden for both copies of the factor V
gene, it increases the risk of DVT/PE by
about five times.
Poor blood flow in the veins. This may
happen when children are confined to
bed in the hospital. It can also occur in
rare conditions where there is
abnormal narrowing of a vein,
including the iliac vein of the left leg
(May-Thurner syndrome) or in the
subclavian vein, near where the arm
meets the chest (Paget-Schoetter
syndrome, also known as venous
thoracic outlet syndrome, or vTOS).
Damage to the inner lining of veins.
This can happen when a “central line”
catheter, such as a “port” or “PICC,
” are
inserted into a major vein. These long,
flexible tubes are used when certain
medications or fluids need to be given,
Other illnesses and certain
medications. A variety of recent or
ongoing illnesses, such as infections,
can activate the clotting system and
make the blood more likely to clot.
Birth control containing estrogen also
increase the risk of DVT/PE, especially
in patients who have a family history of
DVT/PE that occurred before age 50 or
who have other risk factors, especially
factor V Leiden.
stoptheclot.orgWHAT ARE THE SIGNS & SYMPTOMS OF DVT/PE
IN CHILDREN?
DVT/PE in young people can happen in a variety of areas of
the body. Signs and symptoms can depend on the location
as well as on the amount of blockage of blood flow through
the vein.
DVT (“deep vein thrombosis”) in the leg or arm usually
causes painful swelling of the leg or arm, where a part of
the leg or arm becomes noticeably larger than the same
area on the opposite leg or arm.
PE (“pulmonary embolism,
” a blood clot in the arteries of
the lung, which often has come from a blood clot that
broke loose from a DVT of the leg or arm and traveled
back to the heart and into the lungs) can cause
shortness of breath and chest pain that worsens with
deep breathing.
CSVT (“cerebral sinovenous thrombosis,
” a blood clot in
the deep cerebral veins that bring blood toward the
heart from the head) can cause severe or prolonged
headaches. People who severe headaches caused by
CSVT may also have blurred vision, and their headaches
may feel worse after lying down for several hours.
stoptheclot.orgHOW ARE DVT/PE DIAGNOSED
IN CHILDREN?
Definitions:
Scan: A way to take images (similar to
pictures) of something inside the body,
such as a blood clot.
Ultrasound: A type of scan that uses a
wand and sound waves to create an
image of the veins blood flow through
the veins. on a computer. At times
during the procedure, the wand is
pressed down gently on the area of the
body that is located on top of the vein.
The image shows blood flow through
the veins.
Magnetic resonance (MR) venogram:
A type of magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scan that gives us images of the
veins and blood flow. This scan can be
useful in areas that are difficult to
image by ultrasound.
CT pulmonary angiogram: A type of
scan that uses dye injected through an
IV to take images of blood flow in the
lung vessels. This scan is often used to
diagnose a PE.
Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) scan: A
type of scan that measures airflow and
blood flow throughout the lungs.
Computed tomography (CT)
venogram: A type of “CAT” (or CT) scan
of veins that is done after we inject dye
through an IV. This scan gives us
images of the veins and blood flow,
and can be useful in areas that are
difficult to image by ultrasound.
IV: A small flexible tube placed in a
vein, usually on the inside of the elbow
Continued on next page
.
stoptheclot.orgHOW ARE DVT/PE DIAGNOSED
IN CHILDREN?
Continued
Doctors rely on scans to diagnose DVT/PE in
children.
If a DVT is suspected in an arm or leg, an ultrasound is usually
done.
If a DVT is suspected in another part of a child’s body other than
the lungs, an ultrasound may be done or a different type of scan
may be needed, such as a computed tomography (CT)
venogram or magnetic resonance (MR) venogram.
A catheter procedure with dye, called a conventional venogram,
may be needed when abnormalities of the veins are suspected,
such as May-Thurner syndrome or Paget-Schroetter syndrome.
If a PE is suspected, a CT pulmonary angiogram is often used;
sometimes, a ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) scan is done first.
stoptheclot.orgHOW ARE DVT/PE TREATED IN CHILDREN?
Definitions:
Anticoagulants: Medications used to
prevent further blood clotting in the
veins. Most people outside the medical
field call them “blood thinners” or anti-
clotting medication. They don’t “thin”
the blood, they make it more difficult
for your blood to clot. For this reason,
the term “blood thinner” is not
preferred, and is not used in this
resource.
Warfarin: A type of anticoagulant or
anti-clotting medication taken by
mouth as a pill. Warfarin works by
blocking the effect of vitamin K, which
helps several of the “clotting factor”
proteins in our blood to work properly.
Warfarin (sold under the brand name
Coumadin in the U.S.) requires regular
blood draws to monitor its anti-
clotting effect, which can be affected
by many other medications and by
foods that contain vitamin K. Warfarin
also requires an initial period of
treatment with heparin drip or LMWH
at the same time as warfarin is being
taken until the target levels of
warfarin’s anti-clotting effect are
reached.
Heparin drip: A type of anticoagulant
or anti-clotting medication given as a
continuous infusion through an IV (a
flexible tube placed in a “superficial”
(close to the surface) vein, usually in
the arm. Heparin drip is only for short-
term use when treating DVT/PE.
Low-molecular-weight heparin: A
type of anticoagulant given as an
injection every 12 hours. An example of
LMWH include enoxaparin (sold under
the brand name Lovenox in the U.S.)
Unlike heparin drip, LMWH can be
used for both the initial DVT/PE
treatment period and the rest of
DVT/PE treatment.
INR test: A blood test that measures
anti-clotting effect of warfarin.
Continued on next page
stoptheclot.orgHOW ARE DVT/PE TREATED IN CHILDREN?
Continued
Definitions
Treatment
Direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC): A
type of anticoagulant or anti-clotting
medication taken by mouth as a pill or
liquid. After initial treatment with
heparin drip or LMWH, DOACs may be
an option for many children for the
rest of their DVT/PE treatment instead
of LMWH or switching to warfarin. The
anti-clotting effects of DOACs may be
affected by some other medications,
but fewer medications than warfarin.
Also, unlike warfarin, anti-clotting
effects of DOACs are not affected by
foods.
Thrombolysis: Clot-buster therapy.
Thrombolysis can be given in a variety
of ways. Most DVT/PE do not require
this kind of treatment. In general,
thrombolysis medications have a
higher bleeding risk than
anticoagulants. Because of this, their
use is saved for special situations.
When doctors diagnose your child with
blood clots for the first time, they will
usually treat them with anti-clotting
medications, also known as
anticoagulants or “blood thinners.
”
Anti-clotting medications decrease the
risk of a new DVT developing or an
existing DVT getting larger. They also help
prevent a DVT from breaking loose and
traveling to the lungs and causing a PE,
which can be life-threatening.
For most children, the risk of a new DVT
developing, a DVT growing, or a DVT
breaking loose and causing a PE is
highest during the first several weeks after
their DVT/PE was first diagnosed, or first
developed. The length of time of
increased risk for more clots or PE is what
blood doctors (called “hematologists”)
consider when they determine how long a
child with DVT/PE should stay on anti-
clotting medications. (More information
on the topic of length of treatment is
provided later.)
Continued on next page
stoptheclot.orgHOW ARE DVT/PE TREATED IN CHILDREN?
Anti-clotting medications are not proven
to “get rid of” DVT/PE. Doctors and
scientists do not yet fully understand the
factors that lead blood clots to resolve
over time.
Continued
Diet and other medicines can affect
warfarin’s ability to control a child’s blood
clotting. Because of this, warfarin requires
weekly to monthly blood tests to check
clotting levels in a child’s blood. We call
this an international normalized ratio or
INR test. The INR test requires a blood
sample drawn from a vein, usually on the
inside of the elbow.
One factor may include how well a child’s
own blood chemistry works to breaks
down a DVT/PE, which may also be
affected by the types of other illnesses
that the child may have, and how severe
those other illnesses are at the time that
the DVT/PE is being treated.
Doctors usually start to treat children’s
blood clots with anti-clotting
medications while in the hospital. Most
often, they either start children on a
heparin drip through an IV, or with low-
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH)
injections about every 12 hours. After
several days, they either continue LMWH
or switch the anti-clotting medication to
an oral (pill or liquid) option.
Before 2021, the main anti-clotting
medication available to children as a pill
was warfarin (known under the brand
name Coumadin in the U.S.).
Some other medicines, but not diet, can
affect the effect of DOACs on blood
clotting. Although DOACs may be a
treatment option for many children with
blood clots, LMWH or warfarin may be
recommended by a child’s hematologist.
For example, if a child has a type of
antibody in the blood called an
“antiphospholipid antibody” (tested at the
time that the DVT/PE is diagnosed),
LMWH may be recommended instead of a
DOAC. Teenagers, children with
autoimmune conditions, recent infections,
and whose DVT/PE seemed to develop
without any triggering factors or events
may be at risk for having these
antiphospholipid antibodies.
Continued on next page
stoptheclot.orgHOW ARE DVT/PE TREATED IN CHILDREN?
Continued
In some severe cases of DVT/PE, doctors may recommend clot-buster
therapy – called “thrombolysis”
– in the first few days or weeks of blood
clot treatment. Due to bleeding risks and other risks that are related to
clot-buster medications and procedures, it is not recommended in most
children.
Unlike anti-clotting medications, clot-buster therapy removes or breaks
up your child’s blood clot. If a child undergoes clot-busting treatment,
anti-clotting medications are needed afterward to prevent new blood
clots from forming.
In addition to selecting the treatment for a child’s DVT/PE, hematologists
also try to identify the risk factors that may have contributed to their
DVT/PE. Reducing or eliminating those contributing risk factors also
helps to prevent a DVT from growing or new DVTs/PEs from developing.
For example:
Doctors prescribe antibiotics to treat severe bacterial infections that
may have contributed to the development of a child’s DVT/PE.
If a teenager is taking birth control pills that contain estrogen, doctors
will stop or switch that medication since receiving extra estrogen
contributes to the development of a DVT/PE.
If a child’s DVT occurred near a catheter that is in a deep vein (“central
venous catheter” or “central line”), the central line will usually be
removed as soon as it is no longer needed.
stoptheclot.orgWHAT SHOULD PARENTS LOOK FOR WHEN THEIR
CHILDREN TAKE MEDICATIONS FOR BLOOD CLOTS?
When a child takes anti-clotting
medications, it lowers the risk of new
DVT/PE. However, it does not lower this
risk to zero. Parents whose child was
recently diagnosed should look for new
signs and symptoms of DVT/PE, and for
signs and symptoms that of the DVT/PE
getting worse. Signs and symptoms of
DVT/PE are reviewed in an earlier
section of this resource.
Bruises in areas of injury can occur
more easily and grow larger.
Teenage girls may have heavier
periods.
Parents should seek prompt
medical attention for their child
with DVT/PE if:
Parents whose child is on treatment
with anti-clotting medications also
need to look for signs of bleeding. They
should also make a plan with their
child’s doctor about what to if their
child starts bleeding while taking anti-
clotting medications.
Children taking anti-clotting
medications may experience
some of these side-effects:
The child has new signs or symptoms
of a DVT/PE (see prior section on signs
and symptoms of DVT/PE).
The signs and symptoms of the child’s
DVT/PE get worse.
The child bleeds often, or for a long
time.
Small cuts on the skin may ooze
longer than they did before.
Nosebleeds can occur more
frequently or last longer.
The child becomes pale or tired after
bleeding has occurred.
The child develops any other issues
that the doctor has discussed with the
parents as needing prompt medical
attention.
stoptheclot.orgHOW LONG DO CHILDREN NEED TO REMAIN ON ANTI-
CLOTTING MEDICATIONS?
For many children who have developed DVT/PE with contributing
factors identified (in other words, whose DVT/PE did not occur “out of
the blue”), the length of treatment with anti-clotting medications can be
as short as six weeks, especially if the contributing factors are no longer
present, or much less significant, by that time. This was shown in a
recent multi-national research study called Kids-DOTT, funded by the
U.S. National Institutes of Health.
However, for children whose DVT/PE have no contributing factors
identified, or who have had another DVT/PE in the past, or who for other
reasons do not fit the features of children who participated in Kids-DOTT,
the length of treatment with anti-clotting medications is typically three
months.
For children whose DVT/PE had no contributing factors identified, or
who have strong and long-lasting risk factors for developing new
DVT/PE, or who have had multiple prior DVTs/PEs, the length of
treatment may be six to 12 months or even life-long.
stoptheclot.orgWHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF
DVT/PE IN CHILDREN?
Potential long-term effects of DVT/PE
depend on the parts of the body or
organs involved. For example:
After a child has a leg or arm DVT, the
clotted vein can be damaged by the
increased pressure so that they no
longer work as well in bringing blood
back toward the heart. This condition –
known as “chronic venous
insufficiency” or “post-thrombotic
syndrome (PTS)”
– develops in about
25% of patients.
Children with PTS can have
swelling, pain, aching, heaviness,
itching, tingling, color changes,
rash or sores on the skin of their
arm or leg where they had the DVT.
For most children, PTS symptoms
are mild, and mainly occur after
standing or exercising.
PTS symptoms are usually
improved by elevating the arm or
leg and using custom-fit
graduated compression stockings
(GCS) that are prescribed by your
child’s doctor.
After a PE, children can develop long-
term breathing problems from
pulmonary hypertension. This results
from increased pressure in the
pulmonary artery, which brings blood
from the heart to the lungs. Other
times, long-term breathing problems
can occur from areas of lung damage
(known as pulmonary infarction) due
to blockage in blood flow.
If a CSVT has caused bleeding or
infarction (damage to the brain tissue)
due to increased pressure in the
vessels of the brain, a child can have
long-term neurological difficulties,
such as weakness of one side of the
body or face. Children can also develop
chronic headaches if there is increased
pressure in the brain from chronic
blockage in the drainage of blood back
to the heart.
If the increased pressure affects the
optic nerve, it can cause blurred vision
and long-term vision damage.
Procedures can be done to prevent
vision damage.
Continued on next page
stoptheclot.orgWHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF
DVT/PE IN CHILDREN?
Continued
Children with DVT of the kidney veins (known as renal vein thrombosis) can
develop high blood pressure.
Children with DVT of the liver veins (known as hepatic vein thrombosis) or the
portal vein (portal vein thrombosis) can result in spleen enlargement, which
can cause low blood cell counts. Hepatic and portal vein thrombosis can
cause bleeding in the stomach or esophagus from increased pressure in the
veins that return blood to the heart from these areas. (Note: The portal vein
drains blood from the intestines, spleen and other organs into the liver).
stoptheclot.orgHOW CAN DVT/PE BE PREVENTED IN CHILDREN?
For prevention of DVT/PE in children,
doctors usually prescribe less intense
dosing of anti-clotting medication than is
used for treatment of DVT/PE in adults.
In children who were born with a certain
type of heart condition, recent research
suggests that DOACs may be useful for
preventing DVT/PE and blood clots in the
arteries.
Putting a plan in place with the child’s
hematologist for how to prevent
DVT/PE in a child who has a personal
or strong family history of DVT/PE or
genetic risk factor during situations in
which a child’s risk of DVT/PE is
increased. These situations include
hospitalizations and after certain
surgeries. This plan may involve using
anti-clotting medication for a short
period of time, at a less intense dosing
than is used for treating DVT/PE, until
the child is back to their usual state of
health.
Other steps that can be taken to help
prevent DVT/PE from occurring include:
Staying well-hydrated and drinking
plenty of fluids that have very little
sugar or caffeine. (Dehydration
increases the risk of DVT/PE.)
Not smoking or vaping. Smoking
damages the inner lining of blood
vessels and increase the risk of DVT/PE
as well as clots in the arteries.
Not taking estrogen, such as birth
control pills, especially if the child is
known to have factor V Leiden or
family members who developed
DVT/PE at younger than 50 years old.
stoptheclot.org