How to Prevent and Manage
Delirium in PICU
Glasses/ Hearing Aids. Those
with hearing and vision problems
are more at risk of delirium. Make sure
your child has their glasses/hearing aid
with them in PICU.
Communication Aids. If your child
uses a communication board or device or
sign language to communicate please let
the PICU team know. Those with commu-
nication difficulties are more at risk of de-
veloping delirium.
Sleep. Children with an altered
sleep/ wake cycle in PICU, are more
at risk of developing delirium.
Day: Blinds wide open for natural light.
Encourage play and activities with help of
PICU team. Should only have naps if
that’s usual routine at home
Night: Turn off TV, keep as quiet as pos-
sible, Keep lights dimmed, and follow
usual night time routine.
Mobility. Immobile children are
more at risk of developing delirium.
Children in PICU will be encouraged
to do different mobility activities as part of
the EMU program.
Toys/ Comfort Items. Bringing
a child’s favorite toys, teddies and
comfort blankets from home can help re-
orientate children. When children are
more awake they should fill their time with
play so having age appropriate develop-
mental toys can help.
Photographs. Photographs of
family and friends can help re-orientate
your child and reassure them. You can re-
mind them of who people are in the pho-
tos.
Books. Even when a child is on a
ventilator (breathing machine) and
is on sedation (medicines that make them
sleepy) they can hear things going on
around them. Reading their favourite story
and hearing your voice will reassure them
and let them know they are safe.
Calm Reassuring Voices. Speak-
ing to your child in calm reassuring
voice will help re-orientate your child. Ask-
ing simple questions with a yes no answer
can stop your child becoming agitated. Re-
mind them who they are, where they are,
the time and day.
Soothing Music. Playing music
your child likes and can recog-
nise from home/school may reassure them
and make them feel safe.
Daily Routine Timetable. It is
important to try and recreate as normal a
routine as possible. 
Delirium
Your child has been admitted to Paediatric
Intensive Care Unit (PICU). We know that
being unwell in hospital can temporarily af-
fect memory and cognition in children of all
ages.
Sedation (medication that causes sleepi-
ness) is usually reduced as your child’s phys-
ical condition improves. Their behavior may
not be as you would expect. And they may
be agitated and difficult to communicate with.
At times parents say “this doesn’t seem like
my child”.
We know this can be extremely difficult for
parents. It is important to let the PICU team
know that you do not recognise your child’s
behavior. You may find your child’s condition
frightening. This state of temporary confusion
is called delirium.
What is Delirium?
Delirium is a state of confusion that can sud-
denly appear when a child is unwell. Children
with delirium behave differently than usual
and may act strangely. This delirious state is
usually temporary. When their physical con-
dition improves, the confusion often improves
and eventually goes away. The confused
state can vary in duration from several days
to weeks. Its duration can depend on the se-
verity of their illness, the child’s age and
physical condition.
What you might notice?
 Agitation. Your child may be pulling at
their lines and tubes or trying to get out of
bed. They may be difficult to console.
 Reduced Level of Consciousness. They
may be very sleepy and difficult to com-
municate with.
 Behavioral Changes. Your child may be-
come withdrawn. They may appear para-
noid or mistrusting of people around them.
 Not Recognising People. They may not
recognise people even their parents.
 Perception. Your child may have a dis-
turbed image of their surrounds and may
see and hear things that aren’t there
(hallucinations)
 Memory Problems. The child may not re-
member things that you have just told them.
 Variation Over Time. Your child’s presen-
tation may vary during their stay and may be
worse at night.
What causes Delirium?
Paediatric Delirium is caused by a change in
the neurotransmission pathway (the pathway
where nerve cells pass messages from one
cell to another using small chemicals) and this
causes temporary changes in behavior and
movement.
There is often more than one cause for this
change in neurotransmission and in some cas-
es it may not be possible to identify the exact
cause.
The most common medical causes are fever,
infections, major operations, heart or lung
conditions and the side effects of certain
medications.
Children who are more at risk of
developing delirium are those:
 After Cardiac Surgery.
 Requiring a Ventilator (breathing ma-
chine).
 Requiring sedation (medication to make
them sleepy).
 With an altered sleep/wake cycle.
 Who are immobile.
Treatment of Delirium
The PICU team will try to determine any
medical causes of delirium as quickly as pos-
sible and treat those appropriately.
The main treatment for paediatric delirium is
non-pharmalogical management that tries to
orientate the child and reduce stress and dis-
comfort. The treatment to prevent and man-
age the delirium is the same so the strate-
gies below should be implemented for all
children in PICU.
Children suffering from delirium have difficul-
ty communicating or responding emotionally.
Hearing familiar voices, seeing familiar peo-
ple and toys helps them to re-orientate and
feel safe.