What is pediatric diabetes?
When your child eats, their body turns food into a type of sugar called glucose (glue-kohs). In diabetes (dye-uh-BEE-tees), the sugar level in your child’s blood gets too high.
This happens because of problems with the hormone called insulin. The job of insulin is to move sugar from the blood into the body’s cells so it can be used for energy. Insulin helps keep blood sugar levels normal. It also helps the body use fat and protein. Insulin is made in the pancreas (PAN–cree-us).
There is currently no cure for diabetes but Seattle Children’s researchers are testing ways to someday cure type 1 diabetes. But your child can stay healthy if they work with their healthcare team, take insulin as needed, eat balanced meals and exercise.
There are 2 common types of diabetes. Both make blood sugar levels higher than normal, but they do so in different ways.
Type 1 diabetes
In type 1 diabetes, blood sugar levels rise because the body stops making enough insulin. Sometimes this happens because the pancreas is damaged. Over time the cells that make insulin are destroyed. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune (awe-toe-ih-mewn) process. This means the body destroys its own cells — the cells that make insulin. Type 1 diabetes is most often diagnosed in children and young adults. People with type 1 diabetes must take insulin for life.
Type 2 diabetes
In type 2 diabetes, the body makes insulin but does not respond to it properly. Glucose is less able to enter the cells and supply energy. This makes blood sugar levels rise. Type 2 diabetes is more common in kids older than 10 and in adults. Maintaining a healthy weight, nutrition and physical activity are key to treating type 2 diabetes. People with type 2 diabetes may or may not need to take insulin.
Symptoms of Diabetes
With both types of diabetes, you may not know that anything is wrong at first. The symptoms may take a long time to show up. Type 1 diabetes develops when nearly all the cells that make insulin are destroyed. A child with either type of diabetes may:
	•	Pee (urinate) a lot
	•	Be very thirsty
	•	Feel tired
	•	Lose weight
	•	Feel very hungry
	•	Have trouble seeing
	•	Possibly start wetting the bed
Some kids with type 2 diabetes show changes in their skin. Their skin may be darker or have dry patches on their neck, under their arms or in the groin area. This is called acanthosis nigricans (ah-can-THO-sis nig-reh-CANZ).
Diagnosing Diabetes
If doctors think your child may have diabetes, they will test your child’s blood sugar levels. They may also check your child’s blood or pee (urine) for ketones. These are chemicals that form if your child’s body breaks down fat for energy.
Even if your child does not have symptoms, doctors may check their blood sugar if they have risk factors such as being very overweight.
Treating Diabetes
The goal of treatment is to keep blood sugars at a healthy level. Insulin is part of treatment for all kids with type 1 diabetes and for some with type 2 diabetes. Following a healthy diet and getting exercise are important with either type.
We will help you understand the diagnosis and how to give your child or teen the best possible diabetes care at home. When they are first diagnosed with type 1 diabetes, some children stay in the hospital for 2 or 3 days to get care and learn about managing the condition. If your child is at least 5 years old and otherwise healthy, you and your child may learn about type 1 diabetes in a classroom setting. See what to expect and how to prepare for the Living With Diabetes class (PDF).
For a new onset Type 2 Diabetes diagnosis, your child will learn about type 2 in a diabetes outpatient class to educate them about their disease and get them started on the right track. Ongoing and follow-up care will take place in our dedicated Type 2 Diabetes Clinic.
Insulin
-
Children and teens with type 1 diabetes need insulin to replace the insulin their body does not make. Kids with type 2 diabetes may need insulin or medicine that helps insulin work better in their bodies. Kids can get insulin from shots or an insulin pump. There is no pill form of insulin.
Your doctor will tell you what kind of insulin or medicine your child needs. A nurse will show you or your child how to give the shots or use an insulin pump.
Insulin
-
Children and teens with type 1 diabetes need insulin to replace the insulin their body does not make. Kids with type 2 diabetes may need insulin or medicine that helps insulin work better in their bodies. Kids can get insulin from shots or an insulin pump. There is no pill form of insulin.
Your doctor will tell you what kind of insulin or medicine your child needs. A nurse will show you or your child how to give the shots or use an insulin pump.
Testing ketones
-
Ketones (key-tones) are chemicals that show up in pee (urine), blood or breath when the body breaks down fat for energy. Ketones can build up in your child’s body and make them sick. The body burns fat when there is not enough insulin to allow sugar to be burned for energy.
Your healthcare team will tell you how to test your child’s ketones and how often to test. Testing tells us if your child is taking enough insulin to turn off ketone production.
Urine ketone testing is very important. A method for testing ketones must be kept in the home (and taken on trips) at all times.
Ketones are measured as being negative (our target), small, moderate or large.
Healthy diet
-
A dietitian (die-uh-tish-uhn) will help work out a meal plan for your child. Your healthcare team will tell you how strict your child’s diet needs to be.
When your child eats, their body turns food into a type of sugar called glucose (glue-kohs). Blood glucose (or blood sugar) levels go up. Your child can prevent a sharp, unhealthy rise in blood sugar at mealtime by taking insulin if needed before meals and by eating healthy foods. If your child’s blood sugar drops too low, they may need some quick sugar in the form of juice or candy.
Exercise
-
Being active is good for a child with diabetes. It helps your child’s cells take in glucose. This lowers the blood sugar levels in their body. Talk to your care team about an exercise plan that will be fun for your child, such as walking, soccer or swimming. Check with your doctor before your child makes a big change in exercise habits or starts a new sport.
When your child exercises or goes on an outing, first check their blood sugar. If your child takes insulin, bring a bag packed with:
	•	A water bottle
	•	Glucose tablets, hard candy or juice for emergency low blood sugar
	•	A healthy snack such as crackers and cheese or a sandwich
	•	Supplies needed to check blood sugar
	•	Regular follow-up visits
	•	-
	•	Regular checkups with the healthcare team will help keep your child healthy and find any problems early. High blood sugar levels can damage your child’s eyesight, kidneys, heart and nerves. Diabetes increases the chance of high blood pressure or high levels of fats in your child’s blood. We keep a careful watch to prevent problems.
Emotional and psychological support for your family
-
As we treat your child’s diabetes, our team also cares for your family’s emotional, psychological and social well-being. Our social workers, child life specialist and pediatric psychologist work as a team to help your child and family adjust to and live well with diabetes. Learn how.
Screening for and Preventing Type 1 Diabetes
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) can happen to anyone, no matter their age, overall health, weight or how fit they are. We recommend that all first- and second-degree relatives of persons with T1D be screened for T1D. We also recommend considering screening in patients with a personal or family history of other autoimmune diseases. Even though having a family member with T1D makes you 15 times more likely to get T1D, most people diagnosed each year don't have anyone in their family with T1D. Screening for T1D-related autoantibodies can tell you if you are likely to get T1D and if you are eligible for a medication to delay the onset of T1D. You should speak with your primary care provider (PCP) about getting screened. There are additional free resources for screening, including TrialNet at Benaroya Research Institute and ASK Research Program.
Tests to screen for T1D include:
	•	Glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 autoantibody (GADA)
	•	Insulinoma-associated antigen 2 autoantibody (IA-2A)
	•	Insulin autoantibody (IAA)
	•	Islet cell autoantibody (ICA)
	•	Zinc transporter 8 autoantibody (ZnT8A)
If your child has positive autoantibodies and you are interested in learning more about prevention (for example, TZIELD), we recommend having your primary care provider refer you to our Endocrinology department.
