Seizures and Epilepsy
This handout explains seizures and their link with epilepsy, treatments, triggers, safety tips, and advice for
talking with your child.
What is a seizure? A seizure is what happens when there are disturbances in the electrical
activity of the brain. There are many different types of seizures.
For more information, you can read: “Types of Seizures” by the Epilepsy
Foundation. epilepsy.com/learn/types-seizures
What is epilepsy? Epilepsy is a seizure disorder. We diagnose a child with epilepsy when they
have had 2 seizures, and they were not caused by a medical condition like
fever or something else (unprovoked). We may also diagnosis your child
with epilepsy if they have had 1 seizure and have a high risk for more.
What causes
epilepsy?
• Brain injury: Sometimes epilepsy is caused by an injury to the brain.
This includes head injuries, brain tumors, infections and strokes.
• Genetic conditions: Genetic changes can cause epilepsy.
• How the body processes food: Some children have problems turning
their food into energy or have abnormal metabolism, which can cause
seizures.
• Unknown causes: In many cases, providers cannot tell what is causing a
child’s seizures.
How do we treat epilepsy?
Medicine Providers treat epilepsy with different anti-seizure medicines, depending on
the type of seizure. These medicines do not cure epilepsy. In most cases,
the medicines help control the seizures, make the seizures less severe or
make them happen less often. Your child’s provider will tell you what type
of seizure they think your child is having. They will prescribe a medicine that
works best for your child’s type of seizures.
Side effects Anti-seizure medicines can have side effects. Some of these medicines can
affect how your child thinks, feels or acts. You may notice this at home or
staff may notice it at school. Check in with your child’s teacher to see if this
is happening. If it becomes a problem, your child’s provider may be able to
change your child’s medicine.
Tests to check
medicine level
Other treatment
options
Are there things
that can make
seizures happen
more often?
Will epilepsy affect
my child’s ability to
learn?
Providers may use blood tests to find the right amount of medicine to help
control your child’s seizures. Your provider may change how much your
child takes to get the best seizure control with the least amount of side
effects. Your child’s provider will tell you how often they need blood tests
at a lab. This may be on the same day as your child’s neurology
appointment or a separate day and time. To help prepare your child for
blood tests, visit seattlechildrens.org/photobooks.
Sometimes seizures get better, and some may get worse as your child gets
older. In certain cases, if your child’s seizures are not controlled well with
medicine, we may recommend surgery or special diets (ketogenic or
modified Atkins diet (MAD). Surgery may offer a cure in certain situations.
You can read more in our handout “Epilepsy Surgery: Making a Decision
About Treatment.” seattlechildrens.org/pdf/PE891.pdf
There are some things that cause seizures to happen more often in some
children. These things include:
• Being extra tired
• Not eating well
• Missed doses of medicines
• Flashing bright lights or patterns
• Excessive stress
• Illness
• Fever
• Having a menstrual period
• Drinking alcohol
• Drug use
Most children with epilepsy have good control of their seizures with
medicine. Most children have typical intelligence and attend regular classes
at school.
Some children have seizures that are harder to control or a brain injury or
associated disorder that causes a developmental delay. Children with
autistic spectrum disorder, intellectual disability and cerebral palsy have a
higher risk of developing epilepsy. We may recommend special education
classes for these children to help them learn and develop.
2 of 4Seizures and Epilepsy
Are there activities that my child should avoid because of their seizures?
When there is good
seizure control
Encourage your child to take part in school, sports and family activities. If
you are unsure about an activity, you can ask your child’s provider.
When seizures are not
in good control
Protect your child from activities that may be life-threatening if a seizure
happened, such as swimming without an adult watching, driving a car or
rope climbing. Talk with your child’s provider about activities that are OK
for your child.
General Safety Your child should wear a helmet for activities such as biking, sledding,
skiing, skateboarding and horseback riding. This is true for all children.
It is a good idea for a school-age child to wear a medical I.D. See our
handout “Medical Alert Identification.”
seattlechildrens.org/pdf/PE2417.pdf
Water Safety • A child with epilepsy should never swim alone. Always have a person
within arm’s reach to keep a constant eye on your child and help if they
have a seizure.
• If your child is developmentally able to take a shower, it is the safer than
a bath. They should not lock the door. If they need a bath, a responsible
adult should directly supervise the bath and be able to keep your child’s
head above water at all times.
• For more information, read our handout “Water Safety for Children with
Epilepsy or Seizures.”
seattlechildrens.org/pdf/PE348.pdf
Should I treat my
child differently
now that I know
they have epilepsy?
• Be honest with your child about their medical condition. Encourage
your child's strengths and help them see positive things about their life.
• Try to avoid being too protective. This will help your child learn to cope
with their condition. Discuss this with your child’s providers.
• If your child is developmentally able, help them by giving them a role in
their care, such as tracking and taking their medicine. Try using a pillbox
with separate holders for each day of the week.
• Promote good sleep and eating habits.
3 of 4Seizures and Epilepsy
Where can I get
support?
Read our handouts:
• “Support for Parents of Children with Special Needs: Books and Resources”
seattlechildrens.org/pdf/pe1770.pdf
•
“Siblings of Children with Special Needs: Booklist and Resources”
seattlechildrens.org/pdf/pe1486.pdf
Where can I learn
more?
For more information on recognition of seizure types and epilepsy
syndromes the Epilepsy Foundation has detailed description:
epilepsy.com/what-is-epilepsy/seizure-types
You can find more information on seizure first aid and training at:
learn.epilepsy.com.