Liver Failure
What is liver failure?
Liver failure means the liver cannot perform its vital functions in the body, such as producing chemicals and filtering blood.
Are there different types of liver failure?
-
There are two common types of liver failure: 

When liver failure results from a sudden illness in a person with no history of liver disease, it is called acute or fulminant liver failure.
When liver failure occurs at the end of a long-standing liver disease, it is called chronic liver failure or end-stage liver disease. Chronic liver failure is linked to severe scarring of the liver, which is called cirrhosis.
What causes cirrhosis in children?
-
Another liver condition, biliary atresia, is the leading cause of cirrhosis in children. Biliary atresia happens when children are born without bile ducts or with abnormal bile ducts. Biliary atresia is the reason for about half of all liver transplants among children.
How serious is liver failure?
-
If your child has liver failure, their liver might not get better. They might need a liver transplant for long-term survival.
Who gets liver disease?
-
Liver disease affects people of all ages. There are more than 100 known liver diseases. Serious liver disease affects about 1 in every 2,500 children in the United States.
Symptoms of Liver Failure
Liver failure can happen as the result of many types of problems with the liver. It can come on suddenly — for example, after poisoning with certain chemicals, herbs or even some medicines. It can be the result of a longer-term disease or defect, such as hepatitis or biliary atresia. Symptoms of all these problems vary.

Jaundice
-
One of the first signs of a problem with your child’s liver is jaundice. Jaundice happens when the liver is unable to remove bilirubin, a yellow pigment, from the blood. This gives a yellow color to a child’s skin and the whites of the eyes.

Many healthy babies have mild jaundice, especially during the first week or two of life. This normal type of jaundice usually goes away by the time your child is about 2 weeks old. If jaundice gets worse, take your baby to the doctor to check for a possible liver problem.

Other symptoms of jaundice are: 

Darkening in the color of urine
Pale, grey or white bowel movements (stools)
Other symptoms of liver disease or liver failure
-
Your child might also have these symptoms: 

Bruising or bleeding easily
Weakness
Extreme tiredness (fatigue)
Loss of appetite
Nausea
Trouble thinking
Swelling or bloating in the belly area (abdomen)
Generally feeling ill
Diagnosing Liver Failure
Your child’s doctor may suspect liver failure after: 

Asking you about your child’s symptoms
Examining your child 
Your child will also have blood tests so the doctor can see how well their liver is working.

Treating Liver Failure
Some liver diseases can be treated with medicines. Sometimes, these medicines treat the symptoms of the disease but do not cure it. If your child’s liver is not failing, that may be all the treatment they need.

If your child’s liver condition continues to worsen over time, doctors may give medicines to help their liver work as well as it can for as long as it can. Sometimes children take these medicines to delay the need for a liver transplant or to wait until a liver is available for transplant.

If your child’s condition advances to liver failure, treatment may be a liver transplant. 