Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Children
What is obstructive
sleep apnea?
Obstructive sleep apnea is repeated, brief, temporary breathing pauses
(apneas) during sleep. Lack of breathing reduces oxygen and increases
carbon dioxide (CO2) in the body. These changes signal the brain that
breathing has stopped. The brain then signals the body to briefly awaken
and restart breathing.
These repeated, brief disruptions in sleep (imagine being poked by
someone 15 to 30 times a night) could lead to major daytime symptoms in
children. However, children are usually unaware of waking up, and parents
often describe very restless sleep but usually are not aware their child
wakes up completely.
What causes
obstructive sleep
apnea?
In most children, sleep apnea is caused by large tonsils or adenoids, which
can block the airway. Sleep apnea is also more common in children who
have a higher weight for their age, although some children with enlarged
tonsils and adenoids may weigh less for their age.
Younger children with sleep apnea may have poor growth, because their
nighttime secretion of growth hormone is disrupted. Other children who are
at high risk for sleep apnea include those with a narrow facial bone
structure, a history of cleft palate, and Down syndrome. Children with
allergies, asthma, reflux or frequent sinus infections may also be at risk for
obstructive sleep apnea.
What are the
symptoms of
obstructive sleep
apnea?
• Snoring
• Breathing pauses during sleep or difficulty breathing during sleep
• Mouth breathing
• Noisy breathing
• Restless sleep
• Sweating during sleep
• Morning headaches
• Difficulty waking in the morning
• Nasal voice
Children with obstructive sleep apnea may also have daytime symptoms
because of the sleep disruption. They may be sleepy during the day, take
unplanned naps or fall asleep in school. Children with sleep apnea may also
be moody, irritable or cranky. In addition, your child may have behavior
problems and poor performance in school.
How is obstructive
sleep apnea
diagnosed?
Many children with symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea require an
overnight sleep study to confirm the diagnosis. The sleep study is done in a
specialized sleep laboratory where breathing, heart rate and sleep
interruptions are monitored overnight.
How is obstructive
sleep apnea
treated?
For most children with sleep apnea, removal of tonsils and adenoids, if
enlarged, takes care of the problem. An ear, nose and throat specialist
(ENT) makes the evaluation for such surgery.
• For children who are at a higher weight for their age, dietitians don’t
recommend weight loss. Help your child gain weight at a slower rate as
they grow taller. Let them grow into their weight. Consult with a dietitian
or healthcare provider before attempting a weight loss program if your
child is still growing.
• We may prescribe medicines to treat your child if they have allergies or
asthma.
• We may recommend nasal sprays or sleeping positions to help lessen
snoring.
• Some children benefit from a portable breathing machine used at night,
called continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP).