What is pulmonary hypertension?
Pulmonary hypertension (pronounced PULL-mun-airy hi-per-TEN-shun) is high blood pressure in the lungs. It happens when blood vessels in the lungs cannot expand enough to receive blood coming from the heart.
There is no cure. But treatment can help with some of the symptoms and slow the progress of the disease. Children tend to do better if they get treatment as soon as possible.
How does blood normally move to and from the lungs?
-
Normally, the right ventricle of the heart pumps oxygen-poor (blue) blood to the lungs to pick up oxygen. This blood leaves the heart through the pulmonary artery.
The pulmonary artery branches out and becomes smaller blood vessels in the lungs. The smallest blood vessels in the lungs are called the capillaries. The capillaries have thin walls and run near the small air chambers of the lungs.
The blood absorbs oxygen in the capillaries. Then, the oxygen-rich (red) blood flows into larger vessels to return to the heart. This blood flows into the heart’s left side, where the left ventricle pumps it to the rest of the body.
The pulmonary arteries and lung capillaries have muscle in their walls. This muscle relaxes to allow in more blood or squeezes to allow in less blood based on the body’s needs.
What is different in pulmonary hypertension?
-
In children with pulmonary hypertension, the muscle in the walls of the pulmonary arteries and lung capillaries is thickened. These blood vessels cannot expand easily. When the child’s right ventricle pumps blood toward their lungs, the vessel walls resist more than normal.
The main effect of pulmonary hypertension is that the right ventricle has to work harder to pump blood to the lungs. Because this ventricle is working harder, it gets bigger and thicker, which may lead to heart failure.

What causes pulmonary hypertension?
-
Pulmonary hypertension can have many causes or related diseases.
In children, a common cause is congenital heart disease. Some heart defects can cause pulmonary hypertension because they direct more blood than normal to the pulmonary arteries. This is a reason it can be important to repair heart defects, when possible, before the heart or blood vessels are damaged permanently. Often, pulmonary hypertension improves after doctors repair the heart defect.
Another common cause of pulmonary hypertension in children is lung disease. Lung disease may happen because a baby was born early (prematurely) or they have a congenital lung problem. Children can also get lung disease after being on a machine to help them breathe (mechanical ventilator) for a long time.
Sometimes, children with obstructive sleep apnea get pulmonary hypertension.
Other illnesses that can cause pulmonary hypertension include sickle cell disease, lupus and scleroderma.
Rarely, pulmonary hypertension happens for no clear reason. Then doctors call it idiopathic. In some cases, there is a family history of the condition.

Symptoms of Pulmonary Hypertension
Breathing problems are the most common symptom in children with pulmonary hypertension.
Other symptoms may include:
	•	Feeling short of breath when active
	•	Fainting or feeling weak or dizzy when active
	•	Being more tired than normal
	•	Chest pain
	•	Blue- or purple-tinged skin, lips or fingernails (cyanosis) or skin that looks mottled, grayish or paler than your child’s usual skin color
	•	Swelling in the ankles
If your child has symptoms, they may get worse with exercise or activity.
Diagnosing Pulmonary Hypertension
To diagnose this condition, your child’s provider will examine your child and use a stethoscope to listen to their heart. The provider will ask for details about your child’s symptoms, their health history and your family health history.
Your child will also need an echocardiogram and an electrocardiogram.
To get more information about how their heart and lungs look and work, your child may need some or all of these tests:
	•	Lab tests to tell how your child’s heart and other organs are working
	•	Lung function tests to see how well your child can breathe
	•	Imaging studies to see your child’s lungs and heart, such as a chest X-ray, CT (computed tomography) scan, angiography, nuclear medicine lung scan, or cardiac MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan
	•	Exercise testing
	•	Cardiac catheterization
	•	Sleep studies to see if your child has obstructive sleep apnea
We may also ask your child to do a 6-minute walk test. For this test, we ask your child to walk as far as they can in 6 minutes and then tell us how tired they feel and how well they can breathe. We also check the level of oxygen in their blood. A walk test can be used to check your child’s condition over time to see if it is getting worse.
Treating Pulmonary Hypertension
Without treatment, pulmonary hypertension gets worse and can lead to heart failure. Proper treatment can slow the progress of the disease and help relieve your child’s symptoms. The sooner children get treatment, the better they tend to do.
Care for pulmonary hypertension can be complex. Our Pulmonary Hypertension Clinic nurse coordinates the many services your child may need.
Treatment options include:
Oxygen therapy
-
This means breathing air that has more oxygen than normal through tubes that go into your child’s nose or through a mask that goes over their nose and mouth. This treatment helps open up the blood vessels in their lungs.
Medicines
-
Some children need medicines to relax the muscle in the blood vessels in their lungs or to help their heart pump better. It depends on how serious their condition is. Some children need to take medicine by mouth. Some need to take inhaled medicines. Others need constant medicine through a tube inserted into their vein. This is called infusion therapy, and it uses a pump to give the medicine.
Surgery
-
Children who have pulmonary hypertension due to a congenital heart defect may need surgery to repair the defect. This often improves the pulmonary hypertension.
One option for some children is a Potts shunt. Surgeons can implant this tube to direct excess blood from the pulmonary artery to the aorta. 
New treatments
-
Many new treatments are being developed to help treat pulmonary hypertension, including new oral (by mouth) and inhaled therapies. These developments are exciting, but they also need to be used carefully. The medicines can cause harm if used incorrectly. Some are helpful only for certain groups of patients. Children who receive the newer medicines need to be started on them slowly at the hospital. Families need teaching and support to learn how to give the medicines when their child returns home.
Our Pulmonary Hypertension Clinic team has the expertise to provide the newest and most advanced treatments for your child, as well as education and support for your family.